---
layout: post
title:  "A job search journey"
description: Resumes, interview questions, and things I wish I did
date:   2019-02-20 16:16:00 -0800
categories: jekyll update
---

Lately I've been seeing a lot of blog posts from students and graduating engineers posting about their road to finding an internship, or job after graduation. So I thought what better way to be original than to hop on the latest trend and take you through the journey of finding my first job post-graduation? Here I'll go over my experience with personal projects and resumes, technical interview questions, and things I would do differently. Let's begin.

## The initial impression, and projects

First things first: with almost all job applications, it starts with a resume. Seeing as I've been studying/working/researching in a field tangentially related to software engineering (more on this later) for the better part of my degree, I found my resume to be lacking and needed something to display my technical skills. So, like many other students, I decided to work on some personal projects in my spare time not only to beef up my resume, but to also explore different areas of technology that I found interesting. I began most of my projects over the summer when I had more time, and made all of my projects publicly available on my [GitHub][github-link] in case an employer or the general public was interested. I think it's important to emphasize that these projects do not need to be overtly technical, but also shouldn't be trivial enough where it isn't challenging. However, the process of coming up with an idea, researching what tech stack to use, and building the entire application is often a challenging task in itself, so establishing a minimum viable product should give you plenty to talk about during interviews (and serves as a great learning experience!).

Once I felt comfortable with the applications I made, I focused on writing a resume to the best of my ability. As I've eluded to before, this serves as an initial impression in most job applications, so naturally it's a document that's very important in deciding whether or not you got your foot in the door. Resumes are a very subjective topic, and everyone has their own preferences for what the ideal resume should look like. I'm also not an expert in resume writing, so I won't go into details here (but there are plenty of resources online for that). That being said, something that helped me tremendously was sending out my resume to my friends, supervisors, colleagues, family, etc. - anyone who could give it a look, and ask for feedback. I also posted my resume online (anonymously!) in resume-sharing threads/forums from various websites to get some feedback as well. 

## Technical interview questions

I think it goes without saying that one should 100% practice these, as the majority of interviews in this industry and this day and age have at least one technical component to it. But where to start? It's easy to get obsessed and stressed over these questions, so I started early and paced myself. There are tons of platforms/websites to practice on, and to name drop a few that I used, I used: [Leetcode][leetcode-link], [Geeksforgeeks][geeksforgeeks-link], and [HackerRank][hackerrank-link]. Every one of these has difficulty levels, ranking from easy, to medium, to hard. So naturally, I started off solving easy questions to get used to the style and learn where my weaknesses were. At this point, I also started reviewing data structures, as often times these questions involve recognizing the type of problem being asked, the class of algorithm which can be applicable, and the most suitable data structure to implement that algorithm. 

When I got more comfortable, I moved on to medium level questions, where I spent most of my interview preparation on. Occasionally, I tried to solve hard questions, but some were *really* hard, and I would get stumped. Now, early on during my preparation I tried my hardest not to look at the solutions people discussed, as I was determined to finding the answer myself. Looking back at it now, I **wasted** a lot of time forcing myself to come up with something, when I really didn't have a clue on what to look for. Somewhere along the process I realized that looking at the solutions is beneficial - when I walked through the algorithm and understood it, I found myself learning, understanding the problem more deeply, and adding another technique to my algorithmic problem solving toolkit. It was also at this time where I realized that many problems can be solved using the same techniques; often times a problem disguises itself as something else, and one of the key steps is recognizing this and figuring out what class of algorithm can be used to tackle it (wow, sounds a lot like NP-completeness proofs). Recognizing reducibility of problems is a skill in itself, and does take a lot of practice, so once again, start early!

To wrap this section up, I'll explore a couple of things I found helpful during my practice. Firstly, I would give myself time limits depending on the difficulty of the problem. For easy questions I tried to solve them in 10-15 minutes, for harder questions I gave myself 30-45 minutes. The reason for this is two-fold: the first being I force myself not to spend an eternity fixated on a single question (looking at the solutions help, as explained earlier!), and the second was to try and emulate a real interview. Interviews are time limited, and the pressure of the clock ticking can often cloud thoughts. Therefore, I aimed for deliberate practice under pressure so I would feel more comfortable when the real thing came around. Next, as simple as it may seem, I tailored my preparation to topics I felt I was weak on, and focused on them until I felt confident. Again, doing this helped me recognize patterns between problems, and helped me develop an intuition for which approach to go with. Lastly, in contrast to my previous point, I found picking random questions useful as well; random in the sense that I didn't know what data structure/what class of algorithm to use before hand. I found Leetcode contests to be very helpful in this regard, as it's a timed set of typically four problems with increasing difficulty, and where the problems aren't known beforehand, perfect for an interview!

## Things I would do differently

On a related note to technical interview questions, one thing I'd go back and change is being able to solve a problem using multiple languages. My strongest language is Python, so naturally I used Python to solve almost all of the problems that came my way. While I am a huge fan of Python, there are some bad habits I developed which made it hard for me to transition back to other languages that I know - things like dynamic typing, data structures and syntax made it hard for me to reason about how I would be able to implement the *exact* same solution in a different language, like Java. Python has some really flexible data structures and neat shortcuts for different things, and I got used to them since I would invoke them so frequently. But the problem I came across was it wasn't easily translatable to other languages. As I was solidifying my algorithmic knowledge, I became a stronger Python programmer, but I found my skills in other languages deteriorating. So, note to self... next time, try and implement a solution in at least two languages!

Another thing I would've done differently, while looking back at it, is to have started my projects earlier. Sometimes I felt like I was forcing myself to finish a project, which can impact the quality of the project and takes the fun out of it. I got into software engineering because I really enjoy building things and seeing my ideas manifest, but when working on my own projects, I would've preferred to take my time to build a quality product and enjoy the ride. Sometimes I felt blinded by my need to add to my resume and show off my skillset, when really I started these projects as a curious mind exploring an ecosystem. But I guess now that I've already built some projects, I won't feel this pressure anymore, right...?

If you got to the end, thanks for reading! I also have some statistics and graphics on my job search for you to check out. 

[github-link]: https://github.com/kevinxchan
[geeksforgeeks-link]: https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/
[leetcode-link]: https://leetcode.com/
[hackerrank-link]: https://www.hackerrank.com/

